Procurement rules to introduce a new New Zealand impact test that means that when
government agencies are going out to tender and comparing different
proposals, the impact that a tender would have on the
New Zealand economy in terms of job creation, training opportunities,
value added to this economy, is now required to be
weighted as part of that agency's consideration.
Which is to say, don't just look at what's the lowest cost, look at
what's the highest value. And when you're considering value, consider New
Zealand economic impact. And I've been upfront, I think
that'll give a leg up to Kiwi businesses when they're seeking the revenue that can
come from the government contracts.
When did that come in, sorry?
Hold on. Questions to the chair.
Yeah.
You have a supplementary? Yeah.
Yeah, supplementary on that. And thank you for that, Minister.
I was going to ask you a sup on that, which I'll carry on.
So on the procurement processes-
Mm
... the rules have changed in terms of like you just explained.
Is it any easier for Kiwi businesses
to get those contracts or to
actually navigate the processes in terms of just how easy it is to
find your way on
system or anything like that?
Yeah, look, at the same time-
Because we don't-
... as we made those changes, we also looked at
simplifying the rules. So we reduced the number of the rules, because the
way that it had previously operated, you basically needed a PhD
to read through them and navigate them.
So wherever possible, we've simplified them.
In terms of the GET system, the thing that I was really conscious of was that
when I had, as minister, asked questions about, well, what proportion of contracts
do we think go to Kiwi firms, how many Kiwi firms do we think are
bidding, we had really quite a lack of data on all of that.
So the GET system has been updated so that we can capture more data going
forward. Not in a position to share that data with members today, but in the
future,
because of those updates to the GET system, we'll be in a better position to do so.
Thank you.
A question from Belinda Wilson.
I just had a sup on that.
Oh, you have a supplementary?
Yeah.
And can I just say this before you ask your sup,
Vini? I think I might know where you're going because the minister has
gone quite wide, so
I'll just see what your question is, so.
Okay. You can see inside my mind pumping over here.
I think I'm able to do that, so let's see. Yeah.
You mentioned the New Zealand impact test,
Minister.
Mm-hmm.
Can you just give me the date when that sort of applied, so when that would start
to kick in and that we could start seeing examples of how that would play out here
in New Zealand?
Yeah. Look, it came into effect on the 1st of December 2025.
And so that's the fifth
edition of the procurement rules, and that's the ones that were updated with the
new economic benefit rule. And so,
already you would expect that government agencies, whenever they're going out
for tenders, that they are applying those rules, and therefore applying the New
Zealand Economic Impact Test. And I expect in
the coming months to get reporting on how
that is impacting reporting decisions.
Initial reporting
shows that 75% of procurements that occurred between December
2025 and February 2026 included New Zealand
economic benefits. That's great. Thank you.
All right. Krishna Dangiri Manaak you have a supplement?
Yes.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Tena koe, Minister.
Will you be reinstating Māori progressive procurement
targets, given that when they were awarded
3,200 contracts, that was worth 930
million to the Māori and New Zealand economy?
No. Instead, our approach has been to say, in terms of the procurement
rules, that looking at how job creation
and career progression opportunities will be created in
a tender is relevant, and therefore how many New Zealand
businesses are being employed in the delivery of a
contract is a relevant consideration.
And of course,
that supports the Māori workforce and the Māori economy because
many of New Zealand's successful and thriving small businesses are
Māori businesses. And we can see
that there is considerable momentum there with the growth that's been occurring in
the Māori economy. And I have very high confidence that
given the opportunity to bid for government contracts or be part of government
procurement, Māori businesses have every opportunity to succeed.
Okay. A new primary, Ruben Edwards.
Yeah. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you, Minister, for your time this
afternoon. Just wanted to look at,
you talked earlier in one of your answers about projects being dusted off.
Mm-hmm.
I wanted to look at industry closures, so manufacturing where there's dust settling
on manufacturing.
Mm-hmm.
We're seeing this across New Zealand.
Heinz Watties has confirmed 300 jobs.
McCain shutting a processing plant, hundreds of jobs there.
Kaitaia Timber Mills, 200 jobs in the Far North put at risk.
So we're seeing this across the country.
Can you point to a single appropriation in the budget that'll stop the
next factory from closing?
Well,
the member will be
welcome to a view that says that government budgets should have line
items developing individual factories and funding
the development of state-owned factories.
That's a hark back to a version of communism that I don't support,
because I think what you want to see is the private sector choosing to invest in
manufacturing facilities and to develop manufacturing facilities.
I, like the member, and I'm sure like all of the members around this table,
have been really disappointed to see the closure of those New Zealand food
manufacturers with iconic brands, long-standing relationships
with local suppliers,
long-standing employment of people in communities.
And so when they close or downscale,
it is a very significant and sad impact for their
communities and for the New Zealand economy, and I fully acknowledge that.
What I am given confidence by is the growth, the bounce
back that we've seen in manufacturing in the latest GDP
data. In particular, what that shows is that for the
quarter,
manufacturing grew 1.9%, which was above
most forecasts. And that was quite specifically in relation to the
member's question, not just for non-food manufacturing, but quite
specifically for food manufacturing as well.
So that's showing solid growth, and absolutely we want to see that.
And again, what that comes back to in terms of government budgets is
us creating conditions in which manufacturers are able to
succeed. For them, what that means is a good tax environment, an environment
in which they have export opportunities offshore, and our work with the
UAE on trade missions with India is really relevant
for their future prospects. It's also about ensuring that they can rely
on good infrastructure, that we are continuing to invest in the renewable energy
assets that will lead to more affordable electricity in the long run.
It is about things such as our work to progress rates
caps, which ultimately, rates are a cost that face manufacturers just as they
face households. So I'm confident that we are creating the business conditions
which will allow manufacturers to succeed into the future.
Awesome.
Yeah.
So, in the budget, you've set aside
$815,000 just transitions for those people that you've said
you're sad for because of the loss of their jobs.
Is that the sum total of the investment into
that transition work?
Well, I think the member has a very narrow view of how an economy works, because
ultimately what we want to see is that we have an economy where there are
opportunities for existing manufacturers to expand,
for new manufacturers to establish, so that more jobs are created
in that sector, in that industry for all New Zealanders.
What we also want to see is an economy that's dynamic, which is to
say that there are more jobs and opportunities being created in new places.
And so what I'm buoyed by is the fact that overall, with the
economic foundations that our budget puts in place, we are
forecasting 220,000 jobs being created, new
businesses being created, exports expanding,
and businesses continuing to grow.
Because what that tells me is that in the coming months and years, there will be
more opportunities in communities.
And that is not to say that there haven't been significant
setbacks, that there have been business failures. That is the case.
But as we look to the future, we can see stronger foundations from which
opportunities will grow.
Scott, you have a primary finish? Yeah. Scott Willis.
Yes. Thank you. And when you were talking about investment in renewable
electricity generation-
Mm
... or in lowering electricity prices in particular,
government's put forward a 200 million gas security fund, but is
also funding gas transition,
transition away from gas. Do you think there's some inconsistency, given that we
know that we don't have any more gas-
Mm
... to put money into something that is a dead end, while also
funding that dead end away from that?
Well, respectfully-
Is this a sensible use of public money?
Yes, we-- yes, it is. And respectfully, I don't think it's fair to say that
gas is a dead end in New Zealand. As much as Jacinda Ardern
and James Shaw and Holly Walker tried to make it a dead end, the
reality is that the choice to ban oil and gas
exploration provided a massive Confidence not to those
seeking to explore for natural gas, but it is the case
that many experts will tell you that there are likely more
significant gas reserves in New Zealand.
The challenge has been twofold. One, the ban has put off people
exploring for those gas reserves and investing and extracting them
because they're worried that a future leftist government would
again make a crazy decision to ban that extraction.
Two, natural gas, which has, in the past, provided a
nationally resilient sovereign source of energy for New
Zealand, has depleted at a faster rate than was previously
expected. And that has had a very significant impact,
not only on natural gas supplies for manufacturers using it directly,
but also on wholesale energy prices.
So our response to those two problems is twofold.
On the one hand, we are trying to create more confidence and
sovereign confidence in our people investing in
natural gas exploration and extraction in New Zealand, and that's what the $200
million fund is about. At the same time, we're being
realistic about the fact that the rapidly diminishing supplies of
gas in the very short and medium term is such that
providing some support to firms previously reliant on gas
to transition to electricity is a positive step
to take, not only for those firms who will get
lower cost finance for making that transition, but also every
time a firm transitions away from natural gas to electricity, that means there's
more gas available in the market for those who have no choice but to use
gas for their manufacturing processes.
So is the minister
pleased to be able to adopt the Giddy fund redux to ensure
that industry can-
I would never go near Giddy with a barge pole, and please never compare anything
I have done with it
... support the transition away from gas.
No. I would never take the Giddy approach of massive
multimillion-dollar free checks of corporate welfare to big
businesses to pad their pockets. Instead, what we've taken
is a very prudent approach, which says that we can use a Crown
guarantee to create lower cost finance for
firms that wish to invest their own money in productive assets that will lower
their costs over the medium to long term, and that's the approach that the gas
transition loan scheme takes.
Dr. David Wilson, your primary.
Yeah.
Well, thank you, Chair. Well, it'd be for me to talk about corporate welfare.
Just wondering whether or not
the review has been done into the subsidy that's provided to the film industry,
as promised to the committee earlier.
And if so, was there anything to
be taken from it?
Yeah. Look, as members will recall,
we had a look at the overall
film subsidy, and consulted
with the sector, who gave us feedback that using the same envelope of money, we
could get more impact
if we made some small changes to it, and we announced those
changes last year.
They related to allowing more people access to the
5% uplift and the rebate, particularly for those doing
post-development
work, and changes in the thresholds for who could apply to it.
Now, I've got a particular page in here that I'm trying to turn to, but someone
might-
21.
Which one? Page 21.
There has been some good evidence that those changes have had a positive
impact. Here we go.
As at April 2026, 14 productions
had registered under the new criteria, including four international and
10 PDV projects. Those
productions are expected to generate about 580 million in
qualifying New Zealand production expenditure and about 145 million
in rebate payments. And looking back over the past decade, the number
of screen firms has grown by 38%, mainly in post-production and
visual effects, which is emerging as a real specialty for New Zealand, which
again supports high-paid jobs, and really good careers for New
Zealanders.
So supplementary.
Yeah.
I'm guessing from your answer that the main evaluation has been around
economic impact-
Mm
... rather than cost benefit.
Yes, there has also been cost benefit analysis,
which shows that,
essentially, the cost benefit analysis, I don't have the specific numbers here, is
that for the dollars that we invest through the rebate, we
get a multiple of return in the form of
investment into the New Zealand economy, creation of jobs, and impact that
would not otherwise have occurred.
The film sector is particular in that
internationally it is just a heavily, heavily
subsidized sector. So basically, if you want to show up to the game,
you need to have something there. Now, my view is that New Zealand should never be
racing to the bottom, competing, saying, "We'll give you the biggest subsidy."
Actually, our offering should be, "This is the best place in the world to
make films because we have the most stunning natural environment, the most
talented people," whether it's Peter Jackson or Taika Waititi,
"and we also have good facilities. We're a good place to do business.
We're not going to tie you up in crazy red tape.
And yeah, by the way, we also have a rebate.
It's not as generous as some others, but it's sufficient that you should give us a
look."
Dr. Vanessa Baining.
Thank you very much. Minister, there's about $52 million that
are allocated for capital expenditure
in the previous budget, and I think it's the same for this budget.
What are your priorities for that capital expenditure at MB?
Yeah. So do you mean the overall capital expenditure for the Crown or
you were just meaning for MB?
Well, just for MB. Yeah, just for MB.
Yeah. I'm going to actually ask you, Nick, to speak to the capital investments to
MB over the coming year. Obviously, it's always a combination of-
Is that part of the-
Sorry?
I was going to ask, is that part of the write-off for-
No. Well, the new investments will be a combination of asset
upgrades, technology upgrades, and other upgrades.
But Nick, if I can get you to speak to that.
Yeah. No. I think Paul may have the full list, but it'll be
A combination of buildings, equipment fit out for
offices, it'll be fleet. What's interesting in the technology
space is that you're increasingly seeing a shift from large capital investments to
more operating.
Mm.
So over time, you'll see less of that capital allocation going towards technology
projects. Paul, do you have a more-
I think that's correct. And just for clarity, the biometric project was not a
capital.
Okay.
That was an operating model, so it's not included in that capital project.
As Nick says, a lot of the work that we do, for capital is actually
IT. We lease most of our properties, with the exception of the Mangere
Refugee Centre, which we do own, and we're doing property upgrades in that space,
as you'd imagine.
We are
forecasting over the next four or five years, we'll have a steady reduction in
capital expenditure as we move our IT to software as a service and
technology as a service onto the cloud.
So you see a much smaller capital program, but we need to balance that out with
increased opex.
Mm. Okay. All right. New question. David Benson.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Subsidies. You've talked about the screen production rebate, the gaming
development sector rebate.
Mm.
You've
seen enormous success, you would agree, from that rebate, as far as
the growth of that industry?
Oh, look, I'm really pleased with the growth that's occurred in that industry, 40%
year on year. So that's great to see.
Fantastic. Did you consider lowering the minimum annual spend for thresholds
for companies to be eligible for the rebate?
No.
Why was that?
As you've just acknowledged, it's already working.
Taxpayer dollars are very precious.
Every dollar that we spend has an opportunity cost.
Every dollar spent
is a dollar that would otherwise be spent in our schools and our hospitals on
public infrastructure. And so in a very tight fiscal environment, where
we have a scheme that's already working and already supporting growth, it hasn't
been a priority to expand it.
So part of the
strength of that scheme is that it stops companies leaving New Zealand.
Have you conducted any work or seen any research to
suggest that the settings as they are currently are sufficient to stop
some of our most successful companies leaving?
Well, as the member literally acknowledged in the framing for your question, we've
had 40% growth in the sector year on year, which would
suggest that it's a sector that's doing very well.
Yes. And are you aware of the
rebates and enticements being offered by other
countries for very successful companies in New Zealand to move
offshore and potentially have better support from
other governments?
Similar to the film subsidy, I'm aware that there will always be countries that,
for many reasons, can afford to be more generous.
Sometimes because they've had more fiscally disciplined governments in the past
that have put them in a stronger position than New Zealand finds itself in after
six years of a labor government. Sometimes because they are
making different trade-offs than we're making.
As we entered into this budget, and in fact each of the three budgets, we have
had on our hands a massive task of repairing the deficit left
to us by the last government as a structural impediment.
Overcoming the debt mountain, which had exploded and more than doubled while
Labor led the government. And we have been having to overcome those two
things while also making essentially essential investments
in critical public services in our schools and our hospitals and worn
down public infrastructure. And we have been prioritizing those things, and at the
same time have sustained what is a generous
rebate for the gaming sector. And I am really pleased to see the
success of that sector. I am very pleased to see it working, and I haven't
seen any evidence to suggest that there is a pressing
need to reform those settings when we are achieving so much growth within
that sector.
Sure. So in that answer, you're talking about responsible fiscal management of
government expenditure-
Mm
... keeping a tight lid on expenditure.
Are you happy that a minister in your government
overspent by more than $30,000 on a four-day trip overseas?
Madam Chair, I'm not sure that that's within the- Yeah. All right ...
jurisdiction of this committee. Do you have any more questions?
I've got more primary questions.
Okay. We move on to Pushta Ganghi Manu.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Minister, do you remain committed to doubling
the Maori economy by 2035? And if so, do
you have any targeted policies or will you introduce any targeted
policies to achieve that?
Well, one of the things that's really compelling about the Maori economy is
the significant growth that has been occurring within it.
And there's two parts to that. Partly that
growth has been tied to the fact that we have seen so much success
happening in our primary industries, and you do see that a number of Maori
businesses are either whenua related or are
related to exporting food, fiber, other products of the
land. Equally, we've seen diversification of the Maori economy.
We're increasing rates of Maori entrepreneurship in terms of small
businesses owned by Maori, in which there are Maori
workers have been flourishing. And so I think it's wrong to
kind of say, well, the Maori economy is always a primary industry based economy.
That's not what the data supports.
Equally, when we look at our goal of export double,
over the next decade, which we're by the way, on track with because
we've had significant export growth, in recent years.
I see Maori exporters as being a huge part of that,
both in terms of ownership of farms, but also value added
products. And many of those exporters are supported
directly by NZTE, who work with focus
businesses that they think have the scope to go global to provide them connections
into international markets. An example that comes to mind for me,
who I've visited in Whakatane is Waimanuka.
Some members will have tried the product. It's a fizzy honey drink.
It's really delicious, and by the way, it's good with whiskey.
And look, they've been working with NZTE to get
that product to market. And a big part of the provenance story, which they're
selling when you buy that product in New York or elsewhere, is that it's
got this unique Maori cultural identity behind it.
And I think that
for a modern day consumer who's prepared to spend a lot of money on a premium
product, that cultural identity story has some value.
So I've got confidence that the Maori economy will grow, but
I think a large part of that will be through export, not just domestic
businesses.
I actually used to work with Joe-
Ah
... who developed Waimaanuka, so-
Wonderful man.
Yeah. I can testify.
But that said, all the acknowledgments you've made, like I said with progressive
procurement, that gave a guaranteed chunk of the pie to ensure that
development. So will you introduce any...
You've mentioned exports.
Mm-hmm.
A portion, some export targets for Māori business.
Well, as I say, I'm seeing so much success across the Māori
economy that I am confident that those businesses, without a
quota, will still be getting support from government
agencies. I know
that NZTE is already working with many Māori
businesses. I know that the changes our government is making across the
board are very facilitative of Māori business.
One of the things that I think is interesting with the FastTrack Act is
that actually some of the applicants for having projects fast-tracked are
iwi or iwi-led organizations, and that's because we
have iwi with significant amounts of capital who want to get on and build
things and develop things on their land with their resources.
And often it's not so much that they're coming to the government saying, "Here's my
cat, can you put something in it?" They're actually saying, "Government, can you
get out of the way? You're putting red tape in the way.
You're stopping us from doing the development, the innovation, the
entrepreneurship that we would like to be doing." And so our government's approach
is to say, wherever we can, let's remove those barriers, and I'm very confident
that that approach supports all businesses, Māori and non-Māori.
Member Davidson.
Thank you.
Wanted to talk about artificial intelligence.
What was the department's AI spend for the last two years, and what's
budgeted going forward for AI in '26?
Again, I have a good couple of pages on this.
So
obviously,
many
staff at MBIE have access to
Copilot, and
I get feedback that they
are seeing as an increasingly important tool for their work.
AI is also deployed in some of the systems through which
they deliver services to New Zealanders, so it is a feature
of some of the immigration system in terms of the checks that need to be carried
out there. And also it is something where MBIE,
I believe, have done pilots with some of their call centers to
provide better logs of calls, better quality assurance.
I am... Does someone know which page it is in my folder? I'm flicking through.
36.
36. There you go.
No minister can operate without a great team.
And so in terms of AI, the overall
figure, as I said,
the ministry has deployed several AI tools, Microsoft Copilot,
Copilot Chat, Copilot Researcher, Genesys Cloud Supervisor AI,
internal training being delivered to introduce staff to key AI concepts,
and as MBIE is developing a regular reporting on the AI program of work, including
investment plans for the future. And when they do those plans, that
includes the AI, the adoption, the risks and the issues.
Since early '25, almost half of MBIE staff have had access to
Copilot to chat,
and usage was showing strong and growing engagement with that.
They also have a capability program, which they are
building skills through MBIE. And in terms of delivery,
a key customer-facing example is the integration of AI
into the call center platform, as I talked about, Genesys Cloud, and that's about
automated call summarization, real-time note generation, voice-enabled IVR
and chatbots. And the benefits for the New Zealander on the other end of
that include reduced wait times, clearer insights into what they're actually trying
to achieve, and more streamlined processes.
AI is also being embedded into the Nexus ministerial services workflow
tool,
and policy teams are using AI to accelerate some of their
work.
Right. Can you tell me more about what that voice-enabled IVR is?
The call center you're talking about?
Yeah.
I can say a bit about that. It's similar to what other departments like
IR and ACC have been doing, so it's being able to
listen to the call effectively, do the transcript, and do the summary notes.
So those are the bits that can take quite a bit of time at the end of a
call for
case managers. And so being able to do that quickly has helped
save time, makes it more efficient. So that's the pilots.
We're more in the pilot phase of that at the moment.
Sure. And just further to that, because the question was around the cost-
Mm-hmm
... both incurred thus far and forecast into the future for those, and there was a
bit of detail in the answer, but there wasn't a dollar figure attached.
So I don't have the full data that you're asking for.
I do know that the ministry's purchase of 970 Microsoft
Copilot 365 licenses came in at a cost of
$423,289.50 in the
'25, '26 year. That's excluding GST.
In terms of overall AI spend, I'm very happy to come back to the
member in writing.
And do you suspect,
or do you know whether there's an increase in that spend or forecast
expenditure?
I don't know, but I would expect there to be.
Because the way that I conceptualize AI is if we think about
the past 20 years, what we have seen across New Zealand
businesses and public service agencies is increasing proportion
of investment happening in digital tools. Why?
To ensure better service to the public, and to assure more
efficient use of taxpayer resources.
As we look to the next decade AI is, in a sense, the
next wave of digital tools.
Mm.
It's about how do we get better services for people, better
informed services, more responsive services, more tailored
services, but do that in a way that achieves maximum value for money.
And so where AI can be used to support a better outcome for the
New Zealander interacting with government, then it is something that we
expect government agencies to consider, but to do so very
mindfully. All of it needs to be used within an ethical framework with data
protections, privacy protections, and in a way that is always tested
against, okay, well, if the hoped-for benefit was that it would make it better for
the consumer on the other end, did it achieve that?
Sure. And that's good to hear, because that mindful approach is something we're
hearing more and more is required-
Absolutely
... especially from the countries that are ahead of us.
Yes.
Are you satisfied that you've got appropriate safeguards in place?
I am satisfied that government agencies take
those protections and controls very
seriously, both in terms of the governance of AI, the
data protocols, and the privacy protocols.
I also fully expect that we need to keep retesting
those.
Mm.
There are principles and policies in place.
Making the Public Service Commissioner now the overall
head of digital for the public service, I think is important, because as
we look to the future, making sure that we have
ethical rules which keep up to
date with technology development, I think does require a center of
accountability. And I think it's appropriate that the leader of the public
service is the leader of that accountability, because this is a
technology that is changing extremely fast.
And so we can't stay still. We can't say, "Look, we've done it.
We've ticked that box. We've got all the protections and protocols in place,"
because I fully expect they will continue to need to evolve as the technology
evolves.
So just to final up on that,
I think.
The people who do those jobs, who work in that space with AI,
with tech, with-
Mm
... all the areas that you've talked about being growth areas, have traditionally
been known as back room or back office roles.
Mm.
You've been very
vocal and confident about the need to reduce back office roles.
Mm-hmm.
How does that marry up with what you're talking about today, about the
need for significant and serious investment in exactly the same
space?
Because what we're working to achieve is that we get more
impact for every dollar that we're investing.
And so if what I can have is one person in a call
center who is doing a beautiful job of
empathetically engaging with the people who call them, but
instead of then having to spend half their time taking call
logs, analyzing previous notes,
writing synthesis and analysis, and instead an AI tool does that for them,
then effectively I'm doubling their productivity.
So what that means is that we can make AI investments that
mean that people in administrative and support roles can
be more effective with the resources that they have.
Which should mean, as we look to the future, it's very realistic to
say that the New Zealand Public Service can be
proportionately more like it's been in the past, which is to say around
1% of the population. It exploded to
1.2% under the
last government, and we don't think it's unrealistic to say that over the next few
years we can get it back to 1%, given all of the modern tools
available to us.
Thank you for the example. It's a good one.
We all dream of days where we have wonderful, friendly, and available people
in call centers to- ... press when you dial the number.
Yeah.
But I would argue that a call center operator is a frontline role,
and in fact, the systems and services that they rely on,
be it AI or IT,
require a level of human engagement and
interaction to ensure that they are operating and that they are safe.
So in your example, the risk is that it doesn't
account for the human resource still required to
ensure those systems are operating with the kind of integrity
that I think all responsible governments would want to know is the case.
Well, you can take a glass half empty approach, as is sort of your role in
opposition, I guess. But my approach is to say,
actually, how do we ensure a better service to the public
with better value for money? And I think that the use of AI
gives us way more options about how we do that.
And often actually, it is welcomed by workers
themselves. The example I'd give you of that was the trial that Health
New Zealand ran of using AI scribes in emergency
rooms where,
for many years, nurses and health practitioners, doctors have said,
"Look, the time you have to spend in the emergency room taking notes, uploading
them, getting them into the right systems, is time that directly takes you
away from being with the people who are waiting in the queue in the
emergency room." And of course, that's what doctors and nurses want to be doing.
They want to be helping people, not sitting at a computer typing stuff in.
So the AI scribe that was trialed in those emergency rooms
freed up literally hours each week that nurses and doctors were then able
to spend face-to-face with patients rather than in admin.
And so I think it's no surprise that the survey feedback, when those
practitioners were then asked, "Well, how did you feel about this AI tool?" They
were overwhelmingly positive because it actually let them focus on the part of
their job that they come to work to do, which is to work with patients.
And so I think there's a win-win opportunity with AI, which is to say, how can we
make work more rewarding and more productive by getting these modern
dot-digital tools to help with some of the parts of the task that actually a
computer can do, and focus our human capability and talent on the bits that
only humans can do.
Right. A supplement to Dr. Davidson.
Yeah, just a brief one. Very good to hear all the gains and advances
in AI.
Along with LLMs and Scribe and the like, there's a
co-requisite-
issue that we need to take care of, and that's data sovereignty.
Mm-hmm.
Can you tell us or assure us that we're building those things as we go?
I'm conscious that for the overall public service, those questions of
our AI protocol systems practices sit with the Minister for,
Public Services and Digital, rather than me.
So I don't want to speak for his portfolio.
But what I can have confidence in is that, MBIE is fully
subscribing to all of those protocols in its work, and that it
tests them against them. I'd invite you, Nick, if you've got any comments to make
about the frameworks and what you're, trialing in using AI.
Yeah. Just to the minister's point, we absolutely work closely with
what's now the GDDA to make sure that we're abiding by all those.
But just to give another couple examples, submissions analysis is
another area that we've been, trialing again to speed up
that process. There's still a really strong role for how do you
analyze and set up the framing, but then allowing a computer to
help with that.
Ministerial correspondence, again, that's an area where we've
been piloting work as well. So we are undertaking quite a lot of
pilotings in a number of areas,
as well as those more larger scale things using systems like Genesis.
You're testing those boundaries.
Exactly.
What I don't want is for the public service to be so scared of using
AI that we end up missing the bus completely, because that would
ultimately mean that people in other countries
around the world will be getting way better
services to their people than we're able to offer Kiwis.
And so we don't want to fall completely behind, in this area.
Supplementary from Ricardo.
Yeah. Thank you. Minister, would you mind confirming whether the rolling out of
AI, at least from MBIE or others, is coming through
baselines, or has there been dedicated funding for that?
And if so, where on the budget is that dedicated-
Largely through a baseline. So the rollout of Copilot is a baseline part of
the IT spend.
Hon Ruben Nelson, another supplementary?
Yeah, just a sup on that. And I appreciate there's been a few.
But you talked in an immediately prior answer about
being afraid about missing out on the AI opportunity, and I totally agree with you.
There is a real risk that we do, and there are huge productivity gains if we
actually get on board responsibly.
Mm-hmm.
And so I think a large part of that is around
making sure the public service understands it and is able
to benefit from it.
Mm.
And a large part of that is about resourcing the very people in
those organizations who will lead that change process and up-skill
people. This is what I was getting at in my earlier questions.
These-
So do you have a question now, Ruben?
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah. Okay.
These are potentially the back room roles that you've talked about getting rid of,
and the
infrastructure that you need within those organizations to do this really
effectively.
Mm-hmm.
So two questions. Do you think that the reduction in those back room
roles to date has impacted your ability or the
public sector to adopt AI?
Mm-hmm.
And secondly, are you confident that there is enough
resource in that space to be making the most of these very real
opportunities?
Yeah. So I will address each of those two questions, but I'd just
make a supplementary comment, which is, I think that,
yes, resourcing and
protocols matter, but leadership's also important.
So I think actually, as ministers and as members of Parliament,
where we think that AI can be a force for good and can be positive, us
just saying that creates freedom for those who wish to use it.
It's been my experience that people can be wary of using it.
They think it's cheating.
And I am always at pains to say to the public servants I work with, "Look,
if you want to
do the quick and dirty AI version and just give me that,
because you've got lots of other things on the work program now, that's a starter
for 10. I'm happy. Put some human eyes over it.
But feel free to use AI in the work that you're developing,"
because I do recognize that experimenting with it is what builds confidence.
In answer to your two questions, first,
do I think that AI has been held back due to resourcing issues? No.
Two, do I think there is sufficient resourcing to allow further AI uptake?
Yes. And an example of that,
the MBIE GenAI skills framework has been developed
by MBIE with in-house developed AI training and an
AI learning hub. It's being rolled out
in the fourth quarter of the year. It's a learning hub designed specifically to
help staff more easily access standards and speed adoption, and
will bring together a range of foundational learning resources for beginners.
So what that shows you is that MBIE, like many other agencies, are
saying, "Actually, to equip our staff to build their capability,
this is a priority for our professional development investment," and
they're making that investment accordingly.
And
people are embracing it. It's positive.
Supplementary, Ricardo.
Thank you.
How are you balancing or considering the procurement of local models when it comes
to AI compared to, say, overseas ones that are
subject to actions like the ones that Trump is taking with Anthropic
and carry out some risks
from overseas jurisdictions that can actually-
I think let's first just be realistic.
We're not going to have a New Zealand firm emerge in the next six months that's as
big as The Magnificent Seven. What we're seeing internationally is that
those leading AI firms in China and the US are
so incredibly capital intensive and so incredibly ahead of the game, that the
chances of something starting up and getting to that size for New Zealand in the
immediate future is very low. In terms of procurement for New
Zealand-based services which incorporate AI rather
than being at the size of an Anthropic, but which
incorporate their own AI agents are adopting AI
mechanisms. I expect that the rewrite we've done of the
procurement rules will fully incentivize that.
Because what those procurement rules include is that New Zealand economic impact
test, which requires any procurement, and that includes IT procurement,
needs to, in the choice between the different tenders, factor
in what New Zealand economic impact will this have in terms of job creation,
career progression, skills development.
And so, we did very much have IT and AI in mind when we were
writing those rules, because actually one of the sectors that I hear the most
grumbles about or have historically, it is our IT sector.
So it always seems like the Aussies win.
And I do think we've got some incredibly smart
developers here who will be adopting AI tools in their
IT products and services, and I would really like to see our government picking
them up. I think of an example which we already are
using, which we've used quite extensively in our fuel monitoring work.
I've just forgotten the name of them, the guys who have been tracking the ships for
us since-
Marine people
... I've met them.
Starboard.
Starboard. So Starboard, which is a New Zealand firm.
Mm-hmm.
And they use a combination of different tools, including AI, to track international
ship movements. And they've been really helpful for us in providing
intelligence during the fuel response.
And I think what that shows you is that actually,
New Zealand firms will incorporate AI in smart ways that will in some cases
be world-leading. And one of the roles the government can play is actually
providing them a revenue source by contracting for it.
All right. A very, very quick question, Dr. Hamish Campbell.
Yes, great.
Really quick. Thank you.
Starboard will not forgive me for having forgotten their name momentarily.
Momentarily.
Got it, yeah. Okay.
You've mentioned in a lot of your answers, Minister, about
exports, and I think you mentioned that it's been 23 trade missions.
You also referenced work with
the UAE and also probably the Gulf States.
Mm.
What impact has this had on our net exports?
Well, total exports reached 31.4 billion in the March
26th quarter, so up from 29.8 billion a year earlier.
April goods exports rose 12% year on year to
8.6 billion. So overall-
That's great
... what we are seeing is massive export growth.
Which is I think, really exciting because
it's intuitive, I think, for New Zealanders that we won't get wealthier selling to
ourselves, that we won't become more prosperous by just trading with each other,
that ultimately greater wealth and prosperity in the future will
come from selling goods and services to the world.
So when our exports are growing, it means the world wants more of what we've got,
and are prepared to pay for it. And so, that's why it's,
I think, been the practice of successive governments, red and blue,
to focus on how do we build the next free trade agreement.
How do we maximize the impact of the free trade agreements we already have.
How do we supplement them with trade missions that ensure our exporters
are getting exposure to those markets.
And there's a really common pattern.
Whenever we've signed free trade agreements, we've seen growth into those
markets from exporters grow significantly.
And I want to credit Labor, who of course were
there when the UK and EU free trade agreements were
progressed. I think we ended up doing the honors on some of the bits of the
signing.
But we have seen growth into those markets expand since those agreements were
forged. And I equally expect the same thing to happen with the India free trade
agreement. These things have many mothers and fathers, but ultimately the
beneficiaries are New Zealand citizens with more jobs, higher incomes, better
opportunities.
That's great. Thank you so much, Minister.
You might get some follow-up written questions.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thanks.
All right, members, we remain in public session.
And the next minister is
I'm going to wait for you.
Oh, okay.
I look forward to the point when you don't have us here afternoon.
Oh, you too.
You too.
Okay, have a great one.
I've still got a lot of questions.
You're free to anything.
Oh, yeah. Young folks.
Yeah.
The IBL-
Wasn't
... stand over the-
Yeah
... events.
Yeah.
Yeah. I'll just rush, yeah. I'm on.
And feel free to jump in if you want me to.
Okay.
Don't get too excited.
Hello,
good afternoon, Minister.
Kia ora.
Is it possible to have some clean glasses? Thanks.
How is everyone?
Good.
Yeah, good.
Good, yeah.
Looking forward to your one hour.
Stuff in here.
It's totally here. Sorry.
I've been dying.
Yeah.
All right. Members, we are live. We are in a public session.
We're live.
Okay.
Um,
we'll just allow another 10 seconds for everybody to settle down.
Thank you.
Mm.
Okay. Thank you, Minister. We have one hour with you, and
if you would like to start with some opening remarks, keeping them brief, around
three minutes.
Great.
Then we will move on to questions. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, today with
me from MB to my right is Nick Blakely, who is the Chief Executive.
I've met him-
We've seen him for a whole day.
Yes. Anna Clark, who is the, um- VCE Labour,
Science and Enterprise. Saskia Veveen, who is the acting
general manager from Tourism New Zealand.
I've got Renee Demochy, who is the chief executive, and Paul Brock,
who is the board chair. And so, as you'll be aware, our top priority is
to unleash economic growth with a target of doubling the value of
exports by 2034,
and tourism and hospitality are critical to achieving this.
In June last year, I launched the Tourism Growth Roadmap, setting out two key
priorities. The first, growing international tourism, including
lifting the value of tourism exports to $19.8 billion,
and importantly, growing the number of New Zealanders working in tourism and
hospitality.
Since then, we've made good progress through initiatives such as the major events
package, the Michelin Guide partnership, and visa waiver
trial for Chinese and Pacific travelers coming through Australia.
With a focus on growth, international tourism is rebounding, with visitor arrivals
now at 94% of the 2019 levels.
Employment is also recovering, with tourism employment up
2.8%
in 2025, compared with '24, and one in nine
New Zealanders employed in this sector.
Looking ahead, a key milestone is the New Zealand Tourism Policy Statement,
which will be released by the end of June.
I've looked at where responsibilities sit and where we need to focus our efforts to
achieve our goal to double the value of tourism exports.
The message from the sector is consistent.
There is a need for clearer direction, better coordination, and a
clarity of roles and responsibilities.
So, the tourism policy statement will provide that direction along with the
clarity and confidence needed for long-term
success. In the 2026/27, IVL
investment will prioritize 60% towards demand initiatives
and 40% towards supply, and I'll share more
details of that in the weeks and months ahead.
The government has commissioned a review of the New Zealand events
system. It will look at what is needed to deliver a national event system
that maximizes public value for investment.
Once it's complete later this year, I'll consider the findings and
announce the next steps.
I've also heard concerns that outdated and overlapping regulations are constraining
growth in the hospitality sector.
In response, our government is undertaking the hospitality review, which is
led by the Minister of Regulation, and it will make recommendations to
reduce red tape and make compliance easier for businesses, supporting the
hospitality sector to grow.
In April, I attended Seatrade Global, the largest cruise
trade show in the world, where I met with major cruise lines.
I received positive feedback on the actions our government is taking to ensure New
Zealand is a welcoming destination for cruise.
I want to see even stronger coordination across government, deeper cooperation
with Australia, and better data and insights to lift our
competitiveness as a world-class cruise destination.
As Minister for Tourism and Hospitality, I'm committed to supporting the sector to
unlock its full potential, driving growth, creating jobs,
and strengthening communities across New Zealand.
I'll welcome any questions that you have.
Thank you. Let's start with Glen Minnick.
Kia ora, Minister, and thank you for being here and for the work that you are
doing. I know that industry
acknowledges what you've done so far.
And I want to start on the Tourism Growth Roadmap, which is just over a
year old now.
And I guess your initial opening comments was around the
objective is to return tourism to the pre-COVID numbers.
We're not there yet. Do you think if it was an ambition to be by the end of
the year? Do you think we will get there?
Yes, I'm confident we are. So we're at 94%.
We've seen strong numbers
for the early weeks of May, which is usually-
A slump
... going into quieter periods.
And listen, the fuel crisis actually hasn't had
too much of a dent on numbers. I know that's what everybody was concerned
about, but we haven't seen that translate in numbers.
That's good.
And actually, in my visit to the US,
if anything, it's actually an opportunity for us.
So as people were wanting to travel, they were then
thinking twice about where they traveled to, and one of our massive
strengths as a destination is that we are seen to be safe and secure.
And so I actually think that that would have played in our favor.
Also, with the Australian market, which is, of course, our biggest market,
some of them may have been thinking about traveling further afield,
and decided actually maybe to keep it closer to home.
So I'm still confident that we will achieve those numbers by the end of
the year,
and the numbers are tracking well in that direction.
In terms of the growth roadmap, yeah, the short term, '24,
'25, '6, the medium term, we're kind of sitting there now.
In terms of delivering what's been promised in the last year, where are we
sitting? And again, in terms of that tourism growth, what is it like?
And getting-- I guess, there's so many moving parts to it.
Are things falling into place, and what are the risks as well?
Yeah. So, absolutely, they're falling into place.
So the
tourism system review that has been undertaken
widely involving the sector,
we've then moved into the development of the tourism
policy statement,
that was announced in March. I released
a section of that last month, which was the roles and
responsibilities. So one of the questions that
continues to be asked is You know, what is central government's
role? What is local government's role?
Yeah.
What is industry's role? And so I think that was
really important. And as I said,
the full tourism policy statement will
be released by the end of this quarter, so the end of
June. And that really just
provides a bit of a focus to say, we're all on
the same page.
Are there some challenging issues ahead? Absolutely.
Part of that is managing growth. And
you'll remember when I sat before this committee last year, I was very
direct about the IVL investment of new spending
being 80% on demand and 20% on supply.
I wanted to see the numbers tracking towards our target
for 2019.
We're tracking the way I had expected.
That's why it's reduced to 60/40,
and I expect then the year after would
be 40/60.
That's open for discussion. If we were well
ahead of where we thought we would be, that could then switch to
2080, for example. So,
it is very deliberate. I've been very transparent with the sector about
it,
and I think part of what they want to see is
a plan, a direction, building on that, and
then also
the decisions around the IVL and the new spend being
open and transparent, which I think-
Yeah. In terms of what you've just said in the roadmap
around working together, with industry, with communities,
with councils, RTOs, et cetera, to better invest in the
tourism system,
is there new funding that you can point to in this year's budget that is
serving the roadmap and serving the investment
in the tourism system?
Yeah, so the focus has been during the tourism system review,
doing the tourism policy statement.
That lays out where we need to go. One of the questions I've had
all along is,
we know that when we get to 100% of 2019,
we do need to then invest in the
supply side,
and that's why I set that as a target.
There is, and we have committed to considering
an accommodation levy in 2027.
But also, I think part of what we need to ensure is that
where funding is currently in the system, is that it is
maintained,
because I think that is also a risk that we need to be awake to.
So how are you or your team
assessing and,
I guess, measuring progress in terms of where we are right now in terms of the
tourism growth roadmap?
Yeah. So in the tourism policy statement, if you look at all of the programs
of work, they're captured-
Yeah
... in that tourism policy statement.
And what's been evident over the last six months
is you have to do things in a systematic way to lay
things out so it's consistent and certain.
And look, there will be some who would have liked to have
jumped
a couple of steps, but actually that was going to be really important to take the
industry with us.
Well, actually, to be working at a similar pace.
And one of the important things, particularly with local government, is being clear
about what their responsibilities are and
what central government's responsibilities are.
And I know you've engaged significantly with local councils as
well, and with regional tourism
organizations. The direction is really important,
and the certainty of that, so they can plan what they're doing, they can
plan investment.
Many of them have destination management plans that they are
chipping away at
and
you will have seen an issue in the news in the last
24 hours about museums and galleries.
Regional museums and galleries have been funded by local councils.
The only one that central government funds is Te Papa, and I don't see that
changing.
And again, what was announced at TRENZ was the roles and
responsibilities, and that included local government and
their facilities, which
are not just for visitors, they are clearly for residents.
And making sure that whole placemaking role of
local council is really important in making places great
places to live, work, as well as visit.
Do you think that regional tourism organizations can do their job
properly when they are constrained by council budgets
and often seen as nice to haves, so when a council is struggling to
balance the books, they're often the first to go?
Surely government should play a role in supporting that in terms of disbursement,
in terms of that. I know it's one of your goals, and
surely those RTOs play a key role in that.
So shouldn't there be some kind of support coming from you and the government on
this?
Yeah, so there has been through Regional Tourism Boost.
Mm-hmm.
So we've done two rounds,
which have really supported the work they do,
and it's really encouraged collaboration.
What some of them have said is
they struggle to get economies of scale, so the
very intent of the Regional Tourism Boost was them
working together,
getting regional dispersal, and we deliberately
approached it so that the regional dispersal would be
in times
Of the year that would spread visitors around, so it
was regional as well.
I do have the figures here somewhere, but I can't lay my hands on
it.
So if I think about,
we've put a couple of different campaigns in.
If I find it, let me just double-check.
So we did a bit of a review. In terms of the
tourism system review, we also looked at
how RTOs were structured, how they're funded.
And what was absolutely staggering was the enormous
variety.
Mm-hmm.
I knew there was a range, but I think it was fair to say that the review
that we did really showed how wide
it was, which was not particularly helpful, I don't think.
And so what we want to see is,
are there ways that the RTOs can collaborate further?
As I said, we have led the way with the regional tourism boosts.
The first one had 15,000 additional
visitors.
Regional tourism boost two goes to the 30th of June,
so we haven't seen any results for that yet.
And I think in this conversation around
Head Start and councils potentially working more closely together
and amalgamating,
then there'll be a timing issue around RTOs and what that might
mean for them. So, we also have to
align with other pieces of work that the government is embarking
on.
Yeah.
I've just got one more question in this round.
You have more supplementary questions?
Just one more supplementary on this, yeah.
Yep.
Just in terms of, so I hear the regional tourism boost.
I guess it seems to me more like a one-off.
But just around, I guess, in terms of that tourism growth roadmap and dispersal,
because I know that in terms of we can't just have everyone in Queenstown or
Rotorua or...
As lovely as it is, how do we actually support the provinces?
So again,
just any tangible mechanisms other than that
regional tourism boost around dispersal and support for
RTOs going forward.
Yeah. So,
two things. One while I remember. So the most recent
figures around value and spend,
every single region
in New Zealand increased in terms of the value of tourism
spend that went into their regions.
So the major events and tourism
package, again, very directly focused on
dispersal,
regional and seasonal, to make sure we're spreading visitors.
If you think about the World Surf League-
Mm
... perfect example.
In May,
it is dead quiet in the Waikato ahead of field days.
So they've had their school holidays,
they've had the public holidays. There's this big fat gap
in May, and then they go into the crazy season of field days.
So while we haven't seen the economic impact of that,
the businesses, accommodation, hospitality,
retail in Raglan said
it was like their Boxing Day-
Mm. Mm
... for 10 days in a row.
Wow.
So that's classic example of regional
dispersal. The event boost has been that lower
level, and when we looked at
where those events were going,
it was very deliberate about
making sure there was really good coverage around New Zealand.
And really importantly, at times of year
that they weren't crowding out
where visitors were already traveling.
So look, the
major events and tourism package is a one-off.
We're doing an event review
at the moment of the entire event
system, and we'll include those new initiatives,
and then we will look at what has the economic impact been, what does
it mean for an event strategy going forward,
so that we can compete with the States and Australia,
and we can grow the economic impact.
Business events is a very big part of that, and
business events are not... So on average, the people
attending a business event spend on average $175
more than any other visitor.
And we're not just talking about the NZICC and
Takina and Te Pai.
There is a new conference center that's about to open in Cromwell.
Right?
Okay.
So whether it's New Plymouth, whether it's Cromwell, whether it's Hamilton,
these are opportunities to spread people around the
country and at different times. And we know business events, in
particular,
are off-peak. They are not the summer periods,
they are off-peak. So,
that was a very long answer,
but the reality is there is a lot of work underway to
drive visitors into different parts of New Zealand at different
times of the year, because we know that is what alleviates-
Mm
... the pressure. So growth can be managed, and it can be
managed well, and that's part of what we've been doing and
will continue to do.
Mm-hmm. Ricardo, checking yours is supplementary or primary?
It's a couple of questions, but it's related to RTOs.
So it's a supplementary then? Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Supplementary.
Supplementary. Go for it.
Minister, what sentiment have you received from RTOs
on the matter of the bulk of the tourism share of the
IVL going back into the consolidated fund rather than improving visitor
experiences, supporting local government investment, or maintaining locals'
general support for tourism?
Well, I think the first thing, there was a misunderstanding, and it
is really important that the record is accurate.
Every dollar of the IVL is invested in tourism and
conservation.
So that is really important.
And you will be aware, as every New Zealander is aware,
that we are in a fiscally constrained environment.
And so,
the Minister of Finance and the government have made decisions around a
portion of the IVL going into the baseline for
tourism and conservation.
The $90 million,
35 million is for new spending in tourism,
and 55 is new spending in conservation.
But it is a 50/50 in total, a 50/50
split between conservation and tourism.
And
what RTOs have fed back to me is
they're concerned about
inconsistent and unstable funding that they receive, which is
what
Mr. Bennett referred to before, where
they'd like longer term certainty of funding
so that they can plan further in advance.
And I do think that the ability of RTOs to
collaborate, either informally or formally work more closely
together through, in line with the conversations we're having
around amalgamation,
I think will make them stronger. And we've actually seen it already in a couple of
areas. Queenstown and Wānaka, they're two separate ones,
but they have the same chief executive, and they're really starting to
see some opportunities to leverage between those two.
Do RTOs want more funding? Absolutely.
Does every organization I meet want more funding? Absolutely.
Mm.
But it is equally about what is the funding that is there,
is it being used for maximum value,
and do we have to prioritize? And we do.
Supplementary, Dr. David Lewis.
Yeah, look, firstly, Minister, congratulations on switching the dial from
destination marketing to destination management, which
is really in this budget, and I congratulate you on doing that.
I think
people have been talking about this for 10 years.
One of the interesting things is that when you're talking to the RTOs,
and I have lead and been involved with one,
that when you look at what the economic development part of an agency, and in fact
City Bike was seen, am I right, within the economic development agencies now?
The RTOs?
It's a real mixture.
Yeah. So system review kind of stuff.
But when it comes down to the destination management side, they feel like
they don't actually have the levers to affect that
change, which comes from this. So I'm really pleased
to see what they've done here with cycle trails and everything else.
But just switching to the system review, I would really encourage and ask you about
whether or not,
as part of local government reform, we could embed this a little
more and streamline it a little more.
There's a question, David?
Yeah. Yep, he's asking if-
Yeah
... through the local government reforms we can embed-
Oh, okay. Yep. All right
... this further. So I think one of the
challenges that I referred to when I did
a stock take, if you like, of all of the RTOs,
is some work alongside
economic development agencies, some are part of an
economic development agency, and others are entirely separate.
Yeah.
And I think that's what makes it more difficult,
because--
and it also depends on which area you are in.
But the reality is that what makes
places great
to work and live are also what makes
great places to visit. So if you think about events,
having events in your town makes it exciting and vibrant
and brilliant to be there. I mean, just look at Christchurch-
Yeah
... and what they have done in the last however many months.
And so we do have to, I
believe, take them in what we're attempting to do as a
first step
with the tourism policy statement,
is to lay out these are the roles for
central government, local government, and industry.
For local government, that sits with the RTOs, but
there are also some local councils who aren't part of an RTO
at all,
and so that's a
challenge.
And there'll be some that say
there are councils that are free riding
on a local RTO or the
RTO that's in the nearest region. That causes quite a bit of tension and
frustration.
But if you think about one in nine jobs being in tourism and hospitality,
local councils have a very, very strong interest in this.
They are the businesses that pay their rates, they are the jobs that employ their
locals,
and we are all in this together.
So definitely need to consider it.
I'm sensing a yes in the sense, just checking.
Yes. Yeah, but also, I've laid it out in the tourism policy statement.
Mm.
And
that has been
developed based on all the engagement and consultation
with councils and stakeholders
since I've been in this role,
and then more specifically, some councils were directly
consulted in the development of the tourism policy statement.
As I said, I announced it
at
the AT Trends last month.
I've not had one council that said, "We don't agree with you."
Mm-hmm.
Which I think is really encouraging.
Great
Right. Dr Vanessa Manning. Next.
Thank you, Minister. Tourism's extremely important to my electorate
of Banks Peninsula, and
I was really heartened to see in some of the appropriations for the budget this
year that they're for the Ngā Haerenga, the New Zealand
Cycle Trail Fund. And one of the announcements was
specifically for the EV charging stations,
which my electorate is going to benefit from.
Just last budget, that was about $7
million, and this budget coming, it's looking at
$16 million. Can you just
clarify whether that is going to be an ongoing investment over
time? Is that going to be a priority for the government?
And also, the announcements recently about those
investments, like the three in my electorate,
is that from the previous $7 million, or is that in the coming
$16 million?
Yeah.
Can you...
So there's a couple of things.
Yeah.
So
what has been a regular amount-
Mm-hmm
... is $8 million.
Yeah.
So from the
IVL,
but separate to the $35 million.
Mm-hmm.
Because the $35 million is for new investment.
The $8 million is from the IVL on an annual basis.
So part of what you're seeing with the $16 million this
year is some of the
Electrify or the
e-charging stations.
Some of it is also
carried forward funding from this financial year,
where for a variety of reasons, projects weren't completed.
Mm-hmm.
But I think one of the things that is really important
is the economic impact of $1.28
billion from our great ride is
way more than anyone would have ever anticipated.
Mm-hmm.
So,
we've got 23 great rides. They see about a
million visitors a year.
Mm-hmm.
If you look at cycle trails more broadly, two and a
half million,
which really shows they're an important part of our infrastructure.
Mm-hmm.
And this is another example where many of them are
significantly funded by local councils.
Mm-hmm.
So when we make decisions about what we're going to fund, it's
then saying, "Well, we're putting in half, council's putting in half."
There's also been the need, unfortunately, in this
financial year for quite a bit of weather related
repair or remediation.
Mm-hmm.
And some of what is also happening is the
consideration of not just repairing a
route that has been damaged, but actually stopping to say, "That's actually now
too vulnerable, so we want to reroute it."
Mm-hmm.
And there's also been additional funding out of the
70 million major events,
and tourism package, 5 million of that was
for cycle trails.
Mm-hmm.
So it's been a combination of different
projects and different parts of the fund.
But I don't want anyone expecting that $16 million as the new
annual amount.
Yep.
The IVL amount,
that was agreed before my time, is $8 million.
Yeah. And just to further on the appropriations and where the
money's going, the
tourism strategic infrastructure and system capability has also
seen an uplift for the '26, '27 years,
from 11.737 to
26.09.
Where are we looking to spend that kind of uplift?
Is there anything in particular we can look forward to?
Well, I think part of what we're doing with the tourism policy
statement is really looking at what is the work we need to do.
So there is definitely some funding that's been set aside
for actions or projects that come out of that.
Once we launch the tourism policy statement,
then we'll look at an implementation plan.
What are the things that we need to deliver on in the first 12 months, 24 months?
And that will require resources.
All right. And a question from Glen Bennett.
Thank you.
I'll spend a bit of time on IVL. I know you've touched on it already,
but around the doubling the value of
exports in 10 years that you have here.
Now, the International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy was established
under the Labor government.
And I guess you've got to spend money, right?
Yeah.
To actually,
if you want to double it, you-
Totally.
And the purpose of the levy was around conservation infrastructure,
use for tourism, and other initiatives related to tourism.
It feels like your government has
cut base ice fund funding, lifted the IVL to kind of carve it
off, and I feel like the biggest conversation I have with people around the
country is, one, it doesn't feel right the government sort of cut
funding to tourism,
because was it four and a half percent that it did feel like we were going in the
right direction. But secondly, the IVL
always feels a bit sort of murky. People are often saying, "We're not quite sure
where it's going and who administers it and what
gathered in regions," or, "How do we do it?" So I guess, how can
people be reassured by you that you are committed to the
growth roadmap?
Yeah.
That the IVL was specifically for tourism and
conservation, but now a lot of it goes into just the baseline
funding for two government agencies.
Yeah. So as I said before- Every dollar of
IVL goes into tourism and conservation.
Yeah.
And you're right, some of it goes into baselines.
And so, where there is significant pressure
on taxpayer funds,
that was seen as an appropriate
measure to take,
because that is funding tourism and conservation.
I'm not going to go into the conservation spend of that,
but there have been very significant projects that if this committee talk to the
Minister of Conservation will be
clear.
I have had that feedback about lack of clarity
around the IVL investment and where it's going.
We have recently released the last report on the
IVL investment plan,
in terms of the backward-looking one.
And there's also information on the MB website about IVL
investments. But,
clearly we need to do a better job of making it clear where
that is
to stakeholders, because I've had the concern raised by stakeholders
and-
Mm
... and that surprised me.
So Nick and the team are well aware of the fact that we need to do a
better job of providing greater transparency about
where the IVL funding is going, when it was committed, when
the project is being delivered,
and those sorts of things. And also,
I want to see greater measurement of impact.
So cycle trails, we've got really clear economic
impact from investments in cycle trails.
As I said before, the event review
will be able to look at where have our investments
been in events, what has that delivered in terms of
overall impact.
Then on individual events
within the event boost, we'll be looking at economic
impact,
as we do with the major events. The event attraction
package will do that as a collective.
And that's on the basis that we do want to ensure that
there is
value for the public,
value for taxpayers in the investments that we're making.
But yep, fair cop, I take the feedback that it hasn't
been easy enough for people to see where that IVL
investment has gone.
And can I just-- I agree.
There's a lot there. It's one of those situations where there's almost too much.
It's not easy to navigate. So absolutely, we've heard
that feedback, and we're working on how we can make that better and be more
proactive with our communication out to RTOs and other stakeholders.
Mm.
Again, I guess it's the
sentiment I'm talking about in terms of people out there seeing that
as a government, as a cabinet, you cut money to tourism,
and that's what people see, and then they feel like-- I guess the pure version of
the IVL was that people believed it was going into building
pathways and bathrooms, and now it's being used to
fund Tourism New Zealand, which desperately needs the money.
So I guess that's the challenge I'm putting to you.
Can you not see it seems like you're saying, "Hey, let's go for growth," but then
we cut money, we put some money somewhere else, and it doesn't seem like you are as
committed as-
Yeah. So-
... you say you are
... so let me--
and estimates is normally forward-looking.
Mm.
But let me just traverse that little piece first.
So when we came into office, yes, there was an expectation that
every government agency,
and
organizations looked at savings because we needed to.
In terms of overall government spending, it was unsustainable, and in order to get
inflation back under control,
we had to look at savings everywhere. That happened.
In that,
in terms of the international visitor levy, it was very clear
when we increased it that every dollar would be for tourism and
conservation. Tourism and hospitality, they'd love that.
Tourism and conservation.
But actually,
there was no kind of comment
publicly that it was all going into
new supply initiatives.
And so that was--
people may have thought that, but there was no basis for that
consideration.
What I have done since I've come into the role is been very clear
about the percentage and the allocation of the
35 million of new spending,
and getting the balance right. So yes, new spending will be required
for growth. But the majority of RTOs still tell
me
their biggest problem is they have capacity, their businesses have
capacity, they want more customers, they want more visitors, and
that is what we have been focusing on as a first priority,
while at the same time
building the system underneath or considering the system underneath,
so that as those numbers grow, we're in a strong
position to manage those increased numbers.
As I've said, and I'm sure I said it here last year,
I'm very acutely aware
of
the discomfort that can come from growth that isn't
managed. And in 2019, in some
quarters there was some concern, and we can't do
that. So currently,
95%
visitor community satisfaction with visitors,
and we need to maintain that level of social
license.
I have also said in my new
performance expectations from Tourism New Zealand-
That they are considering regional dispersal, and they are
considering social license. So those are two new
changes
in what I have set as expectations to the Board of
Tourism New Zealand for that very reason.
So, I
want you to be reassured that I have been listening
and I have heard.
It is not growth at any cost.
Yeah.
It is growth that is managed, that we
invest in
to grow, and then as the numbers grow, invest in
managing that growth.
And so on that, and I get you.
The looking back bit was really around the, I guess the setting the scene of
how you fight in this budget, for
the dispersal of the IVL funding.
Mm.
So I'm assuming you took it to Cabinet and made recommendations of this is
where the IVL should go, to here, here, and here, or we should keep it here.
No. So,
two things. Firstly, I'll add with the major
event and tourism package, there was additional funding put in
that was outside the IVL.
And can I tell you,
squeezing any new money out of the system is a very
rare feat.
Mm.
But that was done very deliberately and carefully.
Then, IVL ministers, the Minister of Finance,
myself, and the Minister of Conservation.
So, we put together proposals. My
proposals fit within the percentages that I've been clear about with the
sector.
Take those
and look at alignment with the Minister of Conservation first and
foremost, because where possible, we want to make sure that we are
leveraging that investment like we did last year with significant investments in
Milford.
And then
a conversation with the Minister of Finance, and that's where the final approval
process is.
Just a couple of stops on the IVL.
Yeah.
Thank you. With the projected income increase from the IVL
forecasted to grow from 190 to about 229,
do you expect or have any appetite to revise the
proportion of that that goes to baselines as opposed to other initiatives?
Well, the decision was
made before my time. But part of what the
Minister of Finance was wanting to do was to provide certainty
around the 90 million that was available for new funding.
But I can promise you, I have started the conversations and will
continue, that as the visitor numbers
grow,
I will be advocating very strongly, and have been already,
that the increase in revenue,
the new spending, should reflect-
Right
...
part of that increase.
And given that the Electrifying Great Rides had a due date of
2024/2025, and it's not yet complete, will this year's
budget allocation from the IVL finish the job?
Yes. Well, that was a contestable process.
I think there were some areas that were
slower to express interest.
And we have now,
I think somebody will need to correct me in terms of what month we will finish
that work. David?
Next year they'll be finished. So they'll be contacted with second round,
and they've all been contacted now, and an expectation from contract is
within 18 months.
Just another one.
Another one, yeah.
If I may.
Minister, do you expect that the continued funding of the Ngā Haerenga
cycle rides through the IVL will expand the number of rides and work towards
connecting the main centers? Or what expectations do you have around this?
Yes. So I partially answered some of that with Dr.
Weinig's question.
There's this live debate. So one of the things we did last
year was allocated some of the funding
for management and maintenance of the rides,
because what we were hearing from the organizations
that ran the Great Rides was
they wanted to be able to ensure they could fund
management and maintenance.
So we did ring-fence some of the funding within the 8 million to do that.
And then the big question is,
do you continue extending the existing
23 Great Rides and fill the
gaps,
or do you look at new rides?
I have been unpopular with some
because I've said, "Actually, we should focus on the 23,"
and doing the extensions or filling the gaps.
The Central Plateau one is a great example.
Some of those areas are
long and expensive, but we do want to cover that.
The Dunedin Tunnel Trails are doing great work,
so we're also trying to extend that so
that over time we absolutely do deliver that
vision of Great Rides from one end of New Zealand,
not just down, but round the country.
But it's great that more and more communities want to
build them.
Mm-hmm.
But then there is also the flip side of co-funding.
And it's not just councils, it's iwi, it's community
donations,
and others that are helping to fund those Great Rides.
But they've been wildly successful.
Mm.
I think at the very first one that we launched in 2009,
with the then Green Party MP, because that was part of our
agreement with the Green Party in that term of Parliament
Fantastic
Thank you. And, yes, you are the Minister for Tourism and Hospitality,
and I would probably be on pot washing duties if I didn't ask some questions.
Sure.
I'm sure they're watching intently.
No.
But often they are seen as the sort of forgotten-
Yeah
... brother or cousin. You mentioned at the start of your opening around the
Minister of Regulations doing the hospitality review.
Mm-hmm.
Can you indicate anything else specifically that Budget
2026 is doing to support hospitality in New Zealand?
Well, obviously the bringing the Michelin Guide to New Zealand is the biggest
one,
and we will launch the guide at the end of this month.
And when we announced that was coming to New Zealand, because
that directly came out of the 2024
Hospitality Summit that was hosted by my predecessor here in
Parliament,
and that was on the list of asks.
And I remember when we
launched it in Auckland last year, because that was,
what, 11 months after? Ten months after?
Something like that, yeah.
And talking to one of the key people in the sector and saying, "How does
it feel now that we've announced it?"
And he said to me it was a pipe dream.
He didn't think we would ever have Michelin in New Zealand.
And that said a lot to me because,
it is really important for those across our
hospitality sector to know that they can
match any top restaurant around the world.
And it's not just for the top restaurants.
One of the things that I don't think has been understood yet in terms of the
size of the opportunity is when we profile
New Zealand food
in a Michelin star restaurant,
it's also speaking to the quality of the food that is
produced by farmers and growers all
over New Zealand.
And I see a really direct opportunity then for
the Fonterras, for the Red Meat Group, for the Zespris, for our
winemakers, to then use that to build
trade exports
overseas. And so the trade missions I was on with the
Prime Minister last year, that is absolutely it.
So,
it is having the Olympics, if you like,
for hospitality. So if you are a young person deciding,
and actually met some of these people when we launched it,
some of the
pastry chefs,
young men and women who were just doing absolutely phenomenal
work,
them then knowing
that they could achieve a standard in New Zealand that was world-leading,
and that they could then work in a restaurant,
world-leading anywhere in the world based on their training and the
skills and work experience they developed here at home.
And I think that's really important for us to raise the
aspiration and the opportunities for New Zealand workers.
I do feel there's a disconnect, though.
And I think of a mum and dad cafe owner in Wanganui or Wellington
or
Wanaka who
are struggling every day to just get enough customers through the door.
And
you would have known the numbers around, so record liquidations of hospitality
businesses
to March this year. And I guess again, in terms of, yep, that's really
wonderful, and I know that there is slowdown, as you said, but in terms of just
those small hospitality operators, what is it you can
offer them or guarantee them this budget-
Yeah
... is actually going to support them going forward?
So here's the interesting thing. So, in the
year to May,
hospitality spend
was up 5.9% on the year before.
So, May 26 compared to May
25 is up 5.9%. The
number of accommodation and food
service businesses grew
by 2.6%.
So although we're reading about liquidations, and they're heartbreaking.
Mm.
Anybody who's started a business who was then in a position where they have
to liquidate, it's hideous. It's hideous for them, for their staff, for their
customers, and their suppliers, right?
But we are seeing
an increase of about 55 businesses month on month.
So there is still confidence in the sector to be able to start
new businesses.
When we deliver the findings from the regulations
review, as I said, led by Minister Seymour,
there will be practical things in that, that we
remove red tape,
that enables them to operate their businesses more easily.
They're not components of the budget.
The hospitality summit that we did this year,
I've not yet received the report back from Hospitality New Zealand in
terms of what they see the priorities are, but we'll
continue to work with them
on delivering the priority ones. And actually, a lot of
them weren't about money.
Mm.
They were about rules, they were about regulations.
Actually, many of them were about relationships, and it was really good, they said,
to have representatives of different government agencies sitting
at the table with them at the summit,
being able to understand
both sides of the equation.
So whether it was MPI and Food Safety,
and the businesses being able to understand why MPI do things a
certain way,
they were able to then say, "Well, this is the impact on us." And so,
that relationship and that connection is also really valuable
But we'll see what's going to happen from Hospitality New Zealand's
feedback from the summit, and Restaurants Association feedback from the summit,
put that into an action plan.
And then also once we get the
final list of actions out of the regulations review,
that'll be the work program that will shift the dial for
hospitality.
Good. All good? Mm-hmm. Oh, you have-
Got one new primary if anyone wants to-
New primary, yep. We do have time.
Boy, then. I do want to come to the Major Event Development Fund.
Mm-hmm.
And again, I think murky is another word that
some people--
I don't know if the word secretive is the right word, but again, around
people
being invited, only invited to apply, that type of thing.
Again, reassurance from-- Again, as I get around, people just
don't quite understand how they can actually get themselves in, and then how the
decisions are made. So can you give us some reassurance that,
I guess, around bang for buck, around making sure that the right
people, that it's not all North Island-centric.
I know there is something in the South Island.
But the fact that it is actually,
obviously, the accountability that you have as the minister, that money is being
well spent.
Yep, absolutely. So,
the major events and tourism package has several components.
We'll focus on the event side.
Forty million was the event attraction package.
Yeah.
Ten million for event boost.
Event boost was more straightforward.
That was really kind of focused more on regional level events.
Didn't have to be a new event. Had to be delivered within a certain period of
time.
If it was an existing event, part of the criteria was it had to have
a new element
that
could or would attract international visitation.
So,
in terms of the numbers,
we had--
I don't have the detail. There were about 200, somebody correct me if I'm wrong,
about 200 applications to the event
boost fund.
Thirty-six events confirmed.
And that was a
group that considered those applications based on the
criteria people applying to the fund.
A lot of them, over half of them,
weren't eligible, didn't fulfill the criteria, so they were off the table
straight away.
And then the recommendations were put forward as to which
ones. We looked at the regional spread and said, "Yes,
go." So 21 events of those have been delivered or are
in delivery. And we will have
economic outcomes from those. The event attraction panel
was--
The event attraction package was very deliberately different.
We wanted to try something different from the existing major
events.
And from some quarters, there was significant concern
about events that weren't eligible within the current
major events criteria.
And so this was the opportunity to widen the scope.
And so, I had a panel of experts,
individuals who work in the event sector, who had particular
expertise, who we deliberately asked to go out
and find new events.
And the World Surfing League is a perfect example.
They would never have come to us-
... applied for the major events.
Snow League in Wanaka is probably another example that wouldn't
have come
through the major events process.
But we went out, or the panel went out hunting for new
events.
They then provided recommendations to me
on
return on investment,
geographic spread,
seasonal spread,
the genre of events. So they weren't all concerts, they weren't all sports
events. Some of them were cultural events and exhibitions,
broad section.
I have not made one decision
that was outside what that panel recommended to me.
Okay.
Right? So this view that I've sat around and dreamt up
events is entirely wrong.
I have just followed the advice of this group of experts.
And then what we want to do
at the end of it,
because there are components that are commercially sensitive,
and bluntly, we are competing with Australia. Mm.
Australia's states don't disclose the values of those
investments. What we will do at the end of it
is put them all together
and say, "This is the economic impact delivered from this
investment." And
it will then determine what we do with the event
strategy going forward. And we might say
concerts
delivered
whatever amount per dollar investment, and that's totally worth
continued investment.
It might say that this other type of event-
Right ... was a bomb, and we shouldn't be doing that in future.
And,
yep, that's on me, and I'm happy
to be in a position where we have
invested in a much wider range of events across the
country than we would have otherwise.
And as I said, I think the numbers when they come in, World
Surf League, within a day of the event starting-
The organizers were like, "Wow, what an
amazing place for us to hold this event."
And part of the bit that's harder to measure, and
I'm looking to Renee for this, is you might
have, say, 15,000, 20,000 physical visitors
at an event,
but millions and millions who watched the event
either through TV or social media.
World Surfing League is in the top five
sports of international
social media reach.
Let's see your help too.
And so the value of that for New Zealand,
we'll attempt to measure it.
Mm.
But it is actually quite hard to do.
Do you want to-
Yeah
... do you want to add to that?
Yeah. Certainly when you look at events, those are the two key metrics,
the number of people who will come for the event, and then the media
eyeballs that can give you the reach for future visitation.
And what we do with the major events is really look
at the media interest and the people who come here and host them beyond the event.
They'll cover the event anyway, that's why they're here.
But we will help them fill the time in between the event so they get
a broader view of New Zealand, what it's like to visit New Zealand.
And we can measure that in a number of ways.
Estimated advertising value, if I was to buy that space, it would cost me X
amount of dollars.
So there's various ways that you can measure that.
But certainly, those are the two key metrics is visitors on the
ground for the event, and then viewership,
and estimated advertising value from people watching the
event.
Mm.
Finals-
Yeah. I guess, and I hear what you're saying, and I get with the commercially
sensitive thing, and so you're going to package it all up, and there might be a
dud or two.
But will it mean you'll get away with sort of tucking it into just a
general report? Or like for example, the music industry in New
Zealand, frustrated, right? Because we're paying for
international artists to come here, and we're not backing them as we could
be. And so will we know-
We're not paying the artist. So let me be clear, we're not paying the
artist.
What the recognition was, was for some
artists,
Linkin Park sold out that arena,
had the highest audience they've ever had in, it's not Spark Arena
anymore. What's it called? Anyway, doesn't matter.
Doesn't matter.
And so they wouldn't have come to New
Zealand without us providing some financial
support, which covers the costs
of them traveling to get here, right?
So the money does not go into the artists' pockets.
One of the things we're looking at, which again, has been feedback we've
received, is
can we provide greater opportunity through that
international artists to then have the
pre-performer
or the warm-up performer
as local.
What is also not well represented is
every component of that concert
supports New Zealand businesses.
The lighting, the riggers, the staging, the caterers,
buses, taxis,
the hotels that look after the artists,
you name it. That all goes into the pockets of New Zealand
businesses. And one of the early comments I heard from the events
sector more broadly
is,
it's really hard for those businesses to survive if they're only doing
three or four big events a year.
But if they've got some international conferences that they're doing, and they're
doing a stage show, and they're doing these concerts, and they're doing the
Chiefs hurricanes, go the Chiefs, just quietly.
If they're doing a wide range, then it means that their businesses
are more stable and successful, and they have the confidence
to invest, take on staff, et cetera.
So it's
those sorts of benefits
that,
probably to be fair, that we didn't communicate well enough
early on.
All right. Minister, we'll have to conclude there. Thank you so much for your time.
Thank you.
And we will get some written questions later on.
Sure.
Thank you.
Thank you for your time. Hope the rest of your afternoon goes well.